Captain Action was the worlds coolest action figure, a comics lover dream of a figure who could change into Superman, Batman, Spider-Man, Captain America, Aquaman, the Phantom, The Lone Ranger (and Tonto, but you need TWO Caps to have the set!), Flash Gordon, Buck Rogers, Sgt Fury, Steve Canyon and the Green Hornet (whew!). Cap was Ideal Toys answer to GI Joe, and in fact, had the same guy behind him, an unsung toy and idea guy named Stan Weston. It was Stan who first came to Hasbro's Don Levine with the idea of an articulated action figure. Don and his Hasbro team took the concept and ran with it, making a huge splash in the toy pool with GI Joe. Stan took his settlement and started his own licensing company, representing DC Comic, Marvel Comics, and King Features.

Stan's company Leisure Concepts took the idea of a new 12in articulated action figure (NOT a doll, thank you) to Ideal, who was looking for an answer to GI Joe. Stan proposed Captain Magic, a many-in-one hero, who could adopt the guise of several heroes (who, it just so happened to turn out, were rep't by Leisure Concepts!) The name was changed to Captain Action (to point out the potential ACTION inherent in the toy). The figure hit the market in 1966.

The figure itself had a rather sad and worried expression (a little like George HW Bush), a strange shaped head (so the masks of the various heroes could fit over it) and more detailed musculature than Joe. The original wave included Cap in his blue and black uniform, with lightning sword, and ray gun, and separate Superman, Batman, Lone Ranger, Phantom, Flash Gordon, Captain America, Sgt Fury, Steve Canyon and Aquaman costumes (with assorted accessories), the next wave added Buck Rogers, Green Hornet, and Tonto, with a Blue Lone Ranger variation and collectable flicker rings in each box (collect them all!)

Cap proved popular enough to come back the next year in an expanded line, this time with a sidekick, Action Boy, and a mortal enemy, the blue skinned, exposed brain, bug eyed alien Dr. Evil. Also he picked up a sweet ride in the Silver Streak, a two foot long amphibian car with missile launchers! Added to the line as well were several sets meant to be used by Captain Action in his, well, Captain Action identity. Cap got a four foot working parachute, a jet mortar, a jet pack, weapons arsenal, and several secret weapons to add to his action (yep, the box for the Streak could convert into an Action Cave. Try finding one. I dares ya!). This signaled an attempt by Ideal to build the line and focus on Cap as a hero in his own right, rather than just a base figure for other heroes.

Expansion came to the comics as well! DC Comics put out five issues of Captain Action, by some of their top talent, like Jim Shooter, Gil Kane, and Wally Wood.

The line declined in sales into 1968, when Ideal shut it down. Only a two and a half year run (not that bad in the world of toys), but Captain Action, Action Boy, and the evil Doctor Evil are among the most fondly remembered (and expensive!) action figures of the 1960s.

Captain Action was also a short-lived DC Comic book series, based on the action figure.